
                            The giFTcurs README

                    Christian Häggström <chm@c00.info>
                Göran Weinholt <weinholt@dtek.chalmers.se>


INTRODUCTION
------------

giFTcurs  is  a  curses  based interface to the giFT daemon, a file sharing
system. It allows  you  to  perform  searches  and  control  transfers  and
uploads.  It  supports  multiple  simultaneous searches, filtering, viewing
meta data, customized ordering of search results and transfers,  customized
listing of search results and transfers, and much more.

The  current version number can be found in the NEWS file. giFTcurs is Free
Software and is licensed under the GNU GPL. See the file  COPYING  for  the
exact copying conditions.

INSTALLATION
------------

See the file INSTALL for installation instructions.

If  things  go  well  you should be able to run giFTcurs and connect to the
giFT daemon. If you don't have giFT, look at http://giftproject.org/.

The latest giFTcurs release should always work with the latest  release  of
giFT.  Newer versions of giFT might have changes in the interface protocol.
If things don't work then  you  might  need  to  get  a  newer  version  of
giFTcurs, visit http://www.nongnu.org/giftcurs/.

CONTACTING THE DEVELOPERS / GETTING SUPPORT
-------------------------------------------

You  can  find us in #giFTcurs on irc.freenode.net. These mailing lists are
available:

     giFTcurs-user     discussion between users

     giFTcurs-devel    discussion between developers

     giFTcurs-commits  changes to the CVS

Go to http://savannah.nongnu.org/mail/?group=giftcurs to subscribe  or  see
the  list  archives.  See the AUTHORS file if you want to contact one of us
personally.

CONTRIBUTING
------------

If you wish to contribute to giFTcurs, you should build it from CVS, follow
the giFTcurs-commits mailing list, and at least subscribe to giFTcurs-devel
(the list isn't very active yet). The IRC channel is  also  a  place  where
it's  nice  to  be, since you can talk to other developers much easier, and
get instant notification of commits to the CVS.

Patches should preferably be in unified  context  format.  For  indentation
rules, please refer to src/.indent.pro and indent. Updates to the .po files
should preferably be sent not as patches, but as  whole  files.  Send  your
contributions to the giFTcurs-devel list.

BUILDING FROM CVS
-----------------

When reporting a bug, please try to make sure that it is present in the CVS
version of giFTcurs. Run this to get the CVS source:

     export CVS_RSH=ssh
     cvs -d:ext:anoncvs@savannah.gnu.org:/cvsroot/giftcurs co giFTcurs

Then whenever you want to update the source, just run "cvs -z3 up  -Pd"  in
the  giFTcurs directory. To compile giFTcurs from CVS you must have the GNU
autotools (automake, autoconf), the ncurses headers, gettext and GLib 2.  A
fairly  recent (think 0.10.40) version of gettext is required, since we use
ngettext. With some operating systems you'll need the package gettext-devel
as well. To compile type this:

     ./autogen.sh
     make
     su
     make install

A  common problem is parse errors in the po/ directory, if this happens you
should try to run "cvs up -C" first. If this  doesn't  help,  you  probably
have a broken gettext installation.

PORTABILITY
-----------

giFTcurs is known to work on the following systems:

     AmigaOS  3.0,  Cygwin, Debian GNU/Linux, FreeBSD 5.1, Mac OS X, NetBSD
     1.6.1, and Solaris.

Versions prior to giFTcurs 0.6.0 worked with at least these systems:

     AIX, BeOS, Debian GNU/Hurd, Debian  GNU/Linux  bo  hamm  slink  potato
     woody,  FreeBSD  4.4,  Mac  OS  X,  NetBSD  1.5.2, OpenBSD 3.0, SunOS,
     Solaris, Tru64 (OSF1 V4.0), and cygwin.

Patches/suggestions which fix portability issues are highly appreciated.

SEE ALSO
--------

giFTcurs(1), giFTcurs.conf(5).
