                                      giFT
                                     F.A.Q.
                           Last update: Nov 12, 2002
         All the questions you shouldn't have asked in the IRC channel

                                    Contents

   1  Generic
   2  Problems
   3  Contribute
   4  OpenFT
   5  FastTrack (KaZaa, Morpheus, Grokster)

     ----------------------------------------------------------------------

1  Generic

     * What is giFT?
       giFT is a plugin system that can be used to connect to many different
       networks. But for now OpenFT is the only network you can use. More
       information about the giFT project is in the What is the giFT project?
       document. If you want to write a plugin for other networks (Gnutella,
       OpenNAP), please contact us.
     * Where is your IRC channel?
       irc.openprojects.net, join channel #giFT.
     * And, is it usable already?
       Yes it is, very usable, but also very unstable. If you want to help us
       finding bugs, and you promise to update your copy daily, you may use
       it.
     * Why must I keep my copy up to date?
       Mostly because of OpenFT (see below). The way the network works
       changes a lot, and you can significantly pollute the network if you
       fail to update. Please keep a close eye on the CVS, and update daily,
       or at least once every three days.
     * Well then, how do I install and use giFT?
       That question is pretty much what the Installation Guide is all
       about... go read it.
     * Does giFT work on [platform]?
       giFT/OpenFT works on several platform. See the doc/ directory for
       installation instructions for Windows and MacOS X.
     * Why are you against the distributing of binaries?
       giFT isn't ready for that. And if you're unable to build it yourself,
       it's not for you. We don't want lots different and incompatible
       version floating around, because they pollute our current test
       network.
     * So, when do you release?
       When it's done. Once all feature users will want are implemented and
       all bugs are squashed, and all documentation is up to date... then
       we'll probably release. This could take a few weeks, it could take it
       few months. Just keep checking :-).
     * Why do you use a daemon?
       It creates an easy way for people to focus their time on frontends
       instead of all of so much networking code. Also, if the daemon
       changes, all of the frontends will still function the same as they had
       before. This also makes it so we don't end up with 20 incompatible
       protocols flying around as standalone clients.
     * Why the funny/boring/strange name?
       That's kind of historical. When giFT was still related to FastTrack
       (see below), it used to mean 'generic interface to FastTrack'
       (explains the capitalization) or 'giFT isn't FastTrack'. A while after
       we moved away from FastTrack, and started developing OpenFT, "nobody"
       on the forums suggested to change the name to 'GNU Internet File
       Transfer', and we liked it, so we changed the name. A while after
       that, the name was changed again, because we aren't really a GNU
       project, to 'giFT: Internet File Transfer', and so it will probably
       stay...
     * How did this all begin?
       Development to create a Linux client to KaZaA was our initial goal.
       After a lot of reverse engineering and packet sniffing, a group of
       talented developers which became known as "the givers" stumbled onto
       our project (at the time "kazaatux").
       Within a few weeks, we had a working daemon that could connect to and
       search the KaZaA network. Shortly after, KaZaA released a new version
       of their client which eventually led to the breaking of what we now
       call giFT.
       After the permanent departure of the givers, the giFT team started
       moving development into a new direction; foremost was the desire to
       have a completely open, completely free peer to peer network modeled
       in the image of FastTrack.
       Thus OpenFT was born. giFT was moved to a new plugin architecture
       which would allow the creation of plugins that would make it easy for
       one client to be compatible with any number of networks. The first of
       these plugins were to be OpenFT.

     ----------------------------------------------------------------------

2  Problems

     * Hey, giFT won't connect! (Before I updated it was fine)
       Aha, first of all, you mean OpenFT won't connect. Secondly, the
       difference between the current version you're running and your
       previous version is a major protocol change. Because OpenFT is still
       under heavy development newer versions of the protocol are not
       backwards compatible. Removing your nodes file will usually help. (See
       the 'nodes file' section of the Installation Guide for more
       information).
     * Huh? Where did all those users go? (Before I updated there were tons
       of 'em)
       Like the previous question, this probably has to do with an OpenFT
       protocol change. If all our users would update daily, this wouldn't be
       a problem. The only solution is to be patient (and helping us with
       telling users why they should update daily ;-).
     * Aargh, giFT crashed! What now?
       You've most likely found a bug. Make sure you're using the most recent
       CVS version (it could have been fixed already), and know how to use
       gdb (GNU Debugger). It's wise to do some homework prior to reporting
       bugs. Otherwise, you probably won't be very helpful. (Note: the
       'homework' pages aren't directly applicable to giFT, but meant to
       learn to use gdb.)
     * Help! Why does giFT almost bring my system to a halt?
       Ah, you're running giFT for the first time... giFT is calculating the
       md5sum (this process is called 'hashing') of all your shared files to
       create a database. The next time you run giFT only files that were
       added or changed will be hashed.
     * Hmm, I get strange errors when trying to install, what's up?
       Most likely you haven't read the Installation Guide. You'll have to
       read it anyway, especially before asking questions in our irc channel,
       but the thing that usually works is making sure the needed software is
       up to date (and updating it if it isn't). Make sure you have autoconf
       2.5x, automake 1.4 and libtool 1.4.x. And read the damn Installation
       Guide

     ----------------------------------------------------------------------

3  Contribute

     * How can I help speed up development?
       Use your special skills! If you can code, design a nifty GUI or are
       specialized in Public Relations, or whatever, drop into our IRC
       channel and ask what you can do. Also, clear bugreports, patches and
       more documentation are welcome.
     * I've got an idea! What if...
       You're not the first one. If you want to discuss your idea or the way
       giFT/OpenFT works, please subscribe to
       gift-openft@lists.sourceforge.net.
     * Will giFT be ported to any other hosts?
       The program was initially designed for Linux, but the recent version
       compiles on *BSD, Solaris, OS X, and Windows (natively) too. You're
       always welcome to port giFT to your platform of choice. Please contact
       us if you're successful.
     * Front-end Developers
       See the Interface Protocol Documentation. There are already quite a
       few clients available, our client page lists the ones that work.
       Searching for 'giFT' on SourceForge will find you some more giFT
       related projects. Please check first if you can help an other project,
       before starting your own.
     * I want to make an OpenFT client!
       No, you don't. You want to make a giFT client. Through giFT, OpenFT
       can be used. Otherwise you'll have to include a framework just like
       giFT in your client, and that would be like reinventing the wheel.
       Please read What is the giFT project? for more info.

     ----------------------------------------------------------------------

4  OpenFT

     * What's this OpenFT I've been hearing about?
       It's an Open Source "clone" of FastTrack being worked on by the giFT
       project. We welcome anyone with decentralized/p2p experience to drop
       by and poke around at our design.
     * Can I use OpenFT without giFT?
       Yes, if you write a framework for it, like giFT. So, the real answer
       is: no. If you're still convinced you want to write a new framework,
       maybe even in an other language than C, like Java, C# or whatever,
       please contact us, and we'll talk you out of it.
     * Is there documentation available on how OpenFT works?
       No, but the source code is pretty readable :-). The main problem is to
       find someone motivated enough to write this document, if you want to
       do it, contact us through IRC or use the mailing list.
     * Hey, I can download files with my browser from OpenFT hosts, is OpenFT
       a webserver?
       Uh, no. OpenFT uses an incomplete implementation of the HTTP protocol
       for file transfers from non-firewalled hosts. Theoretically you can
       use it as a webserver for static files, but if you do so, you've
       missed the point :-)

     ----------------------------------------------------------------------

5  FastTrack (KaZaa, Morpheus, Grokster)

     * What is this "FastTrack"?
       FastTrack is the company that licenses the library that KaZaA/Grokster
       (Morpheus uses Gnutella now) operates off of
     * What's your connection with FastTrack?
       giFT 0.9.x used the FastTrack network. FastTrack changed the
       encryption, end of story. Since October 2001 we've been fully focused
       on the "new" giFT and OpenFT. Don't ask us for a FastTrack client,
       just forget about it.
     * Are you working on getting back into FastTrack's network?
       No. Although quite a few people made attempts to reverse engineer the
       new encryption, nobody has succeeded, and nobody is working on it
       anymore because OpenFT kicks so much ass nobody even remembers
       FastTrack.
